pyscg-0009 - addressing issues described in #1053 (#1095)
ossf/wg-best-practices-os-developers: docs/Secure-Coding-Guide-for-Python/04_neutralization/pyscg-0009/README.md

Reviewer: Not anything you did but I wanted to reread the example for reviewing and found this issue!

```suggestion
* Asterisks `ls -1 *.txt` get surrounded by single quotes `ls -1 '*.txt'` so that some Unix commands no longer work.
```

The code in `noncompliant01.py` prints the first line of `/etc/passwd` on Linux or starts `net user` under Windows.
The `FileOperations().list_dir()` method allows an attacker to add commands via `;` in Linux and `&` in Windows.

## Compliant Solution (pathlib)

> The `compliant01.py` code uses the cross-platform compatible `pathlib` module and checking if the `dirname` provided by the user is an actual directory. The `pathlib` on its own will not prevent all attacks.

Reviewer: I think we should add another sentence explaining how the Compliant code example solves this issue, especially since we essentially won't print anything out in the console, which could leave some people confused.

Something like:
pathlib.Path will treat the string that you pass it as a literal file system path preventing any command line injections. Instead of interpreting environment variables like "%HOMEPATH%" or & as a command separator, it will search for a folder by the literal name of the raw string (e.g "%HOMEPATH% & net user" in the windows example.)

Author: I think that's a good idea and your explanation is very clear. I reworded this section of the README to include it.
I also expanded as to why `pathlib` will not prevent all attacks based on the TODO comments and added some links to other rules that could explain how to deal with sanitization and logging.

*[compliant01.py](compliant01.py):*

```python
# SPDX-FileCopyrightText: OpenSSF project contributors
# SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
""" Compliant Code Example """
import os
from pathlib import Path

class FileOperations:
    """Helper class for file system operations"""

    def list_dir(self, dirname: str):
        """List the contents of a directory"""
        path = Path(dirname)
        # TODO: input sanitation
        # TODO: Add secure logging
        if path.is_dir():
            for item in path.iterdir():
                print(item)

#####################
# Trying to exploit above code example
#####################
if "nt" in os.name:

>     FileOperations().list_dir("temp")

Reviewer: Same reasoning as I gave in the code example
```suggestion
    FileOperations().list_dir("%HOMEPATH% & net user")
```

```

When run on Linux, `noncompliant02.py` creates a `toast.sh` file that contains the commands to run. The attacker also creates a folder named `. -exec bash toast.sh {} +` that will later become part of the shell `find` command forming `find . -exec bash toast.sh {} +`.

The attack is similar on Windows, where `noncompliant02.py` instead creates a `toast.bat` file and a directory named `temp & toast.bat`, which is injected into the `dir` command run by the `list_dir()` method.

The result is that `list_dir(dirname)` will run the OS-specific script file without the attacker needing execute rights. Such a file can contain harmful scripts of unlimited length and complexity.

## Compliant Solution (using pathlib recursively)

> The `compliant02.py` also uses `pathlib`, additionally restricting the filesystem area. Again, `pathlib` on its will not sanitize the input or provide a secure logging system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `compliant02.py` also uses `pathlib`, additionally restricting the filesystem area. Again, `pathlib` on its own will not sanitize the input or provide a secure logging system.
```

```

> The `compliant02.py` does not use data that originates from a lesser trusted source in order to form a shell command and would throw an error for an attempt to list content outside of the allowed area. The code is actually not "neutralizing" data itself from an untrusted source as such, the attack is "neutralized" by no longer using `subprocess` or `os` to run `find`.

Reviewer: Just think splitting the first sentence into two separate sentences is a good idea as this sentence kind of confused me and took a few reads from me.
```suggestion
The `compliant02.py` does not use data that originates from a lesser trusted source in order to form a shell command. It will throw an error for an attempt to list content outside of the allowed area. The code is actually not "neutralizing" data itself from an untrusted source as such, the attack is "neutralized" by no longer using `subprocess` or `os` to run `find`.
```
